From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes or weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman posted by Carl Franklin. This
is lawns Ryan announcing show
number 54 recorded Tuesday, March 6th, 2007.
Support for Hanselman it's is
provided by Tellerik R a
D controls the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web application.
online@wwwdottlerik.com. Support is also provided
by slash end software red
carpet subscriptions. The most comprehensive
solution for adding connectivity to
your.net asp.net application with components
for every major internet protocol
online@wwwdotnsoftwaredotcomandby.net developers journal the world's
leading dotnet developer magazine online
at www dot  dot
com in this episodes got
talks with Jay flowers about
continuous integration. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman, and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes
on this episode. Carl's going
to step out for a
second and I'm going to
talk to Jay flowers. This
is the second part of
our a year long two
part series on continuous integration.
We did a show on
continuous integration a long time
ago. I think it was
our first or second show,
and we talked about the
basics of continuous integration. And
then I realized that we
really need to start talking
about squeezing continuous integration. So
the title of this show
is squeezing continuous integration. And
what better person to talk
about that than a than
Jay flowers, the creator of
CEI factory and a general
continuous integration fan. How's it
going, Jay? Oh, it's going
great. Thanks Scott. So you
work on continuous integration stuff
all day, right? You, you
run the bill that your
company. I do. I live,
eat and breathe it. I'd
probably say that I'm not
actually a build master. I
am the building masters developer.
So they're my client. Oh,
really? So you, you, you
don't have a dedicated bill
Meister at your company. I
do. I do his that's
my boss. Your boss is
to build Meister. Yes, we
have a team and he
just tells you what to
do as far as does
he do the continuous integration
set up? No, actually that
was one of those things
that I did in the
company and, you know, had
to, was worried that I
might have to apologize later.
Okay. So like we use
cruise control for our continuous
integration build at my company
and, you know, someone checks
something in and we noticed
that the source control system
has changed kick off a
build. We kick off the
testing, setting up these continuous
integration servers is pretty straightforward.
It's pretty easy. Yes. Well,
I mean, it is now,
but you know, I've been
using CIA factory for a
few years now, so I'm,
I've really gotten used to
it. And I, I would
like to share that with
other people at this point.
Okay. So w what is
the process without CIA factory
in CIA factory is an
open source program that you,
that you worked on. Did
you work on with anyone
else? Some people on projects
that I've worked with, but
never really anybody out in
the open source community, And
it is open source though.
It is. It is. Okay.
So what's the difference between
me wanting to set up
cruise control, straightforward by myself
versus using an assister, like
a sci factory? Well, you're
going to have to understand
cruise control and how to
set it up. And you're
given contacts. You're going to
have to make decisions about,
you know, whether or not
to do it this way,
that way or the other
way. Whereas with CEI factory,
all that stuff is just
taken care of for you.
It, it just works out
of the box. So, so
talk me through the, the
experience briefly where I know
we're going to do a,
a dominant rocks TV soon.
So people are going to
be able to actually see
this, but I downloaded CIA
factory. And then what, So
you would open up the
CII factory solution file in
the root of the, what
you unzip, and that will
have all the configuration files
that you might want to
touch. Cause there's a lot
of files, you know, that,
that go with this and
you don't want to be
hunting pecking around for, is
this the file that I
need to touch? Or is
that the file? So I
just kind of have them
all loaded up in the
solution. So then you can,
you can go to the
main arguments file and customize
any of the pieces that
you need to, to be
concerned about that are going
to be different for your
particular situation. And then you
are loading this individual studio
in visual studio. You can
do it in a text
as well. Yes. Okay. The
reason I did that again
is just cause there's, you
know, there's a lot of
files all over the place
and, and you don't know,
you know, it's, if you
were looking around and explore
for which file you need
to add it and which
file you don't need to
add it. You've, you know,
you're having to figure that
out on your own or
remember it, and this way
with the solution, it just
shows you it's just a
window into what you care
about. So it kinda adds
all this stuff, The visual
studio, as the input into
either basically a code generator,
your code generating your continuous
integrations. Yes, yes. Actually, I'm
using Nant to, to write
everything out. So this is,
Oh, so you're actually using
visual studio to automate Nat.
And then on the other
side, pops out all the
dot config files that one
would need to have a
working cruise control. Yeah. It
even generates ant script as
well. Oh, so it generates
an ant as well. Yes.
So I have Nan generating
Nat. Oh, okay. Now generating
that. Okay. So then within
the, of the CIA factory,
what is a package? Cause
I know that you use
this term a lot, you
have these packages, what does
that mean? Well, so generally
when you're going about doing
your, your build there's activities
that happen, you know, we're
gonna, we're gonna work with
source control and we're gonna
get, you know, the latest
or we're going to get
from the label. Then we're
going to do things like
maybe you do some versioning,
you know, increment the version
numbers, that type of thing,
where we'll do some compiles,
we might do some unit
testing or FX cops. So
we, we have these actions.
So this is, this is
getting into the squeezing part
of it. You can, you
can make a pretty straightforward
CGI, a continuous integration experience
where you, you run Nat
or you run ms. Build,
then you run end unit.
But beyond that is where
we're talking about taking continuous
integration. Right. So you mentioned
FX cop. We talked a
little bit about an depend
an episode or two ago
coverage. I know that you've
used ms. Test before and
you don't like Good. No,
no. I, I, If I
wanted to do this by
myself, if I wanted to
take an existing continuous integration
build that maybe I've already
got going, maybe a listener
has gotten at already working.
Would they still want to
use continuous integration factory to,
to add things to that?
Well, I guess it comes
down to, if you, if
you maintain the scripts yourself,
the only way it's ever
gonna get any better is
because you make it better.
If you were using something
like CEI factory, then you
have, you can add packages
yourself or you can customize
things, but I'm also going
to be continuing to do
this. So you'll gain the
benefit of whatever I produce
as well. So any new
factor that comes out like,
like Simeon is a, is
a product I'm a fan
of for similarity analysis. I've
always wanted to add semi
into my, my continuous integration
build, but it's just, it's
a hassle. And I want
to go in there and
figure out what batch files
to hook up or whatever.
Right. I would just hook
up a package of CI
packet Exactly at the, with
the current release. It doesn't
support installing just one package
to an existing, but that's,
I actually have that working
on, on my box and
just haven't checked it in
yet. So with, with the
RTM of this release, you
will have that ability to,
to upgrade packages as well
as piece mail add, you
know, I want to add
one more package or this,
this other package just got
released. That type of thing.
So folks that are doing
builds themselves that are maybe
listening have probably used Nant
or they've used ms. Build.
And they know that each
of those tools has the
notion of a task there's
nap, tasks for this, and
then there's CC net tasks.
But it sounds like you've
raised kind of the layer
of abstraction, a little higher
than task in a package
while it's close to a
CC net task. It's maybe
a little bit bigger. It's
a little bit, it has
a little bit larger scope.
Is that true? Oh yeah.
It is A, it is
a bigger thing. So there
can be this, this interplay
between packages let's take coverage
packages for, for example, I
have a coverage I package
and there's also a in
cover package and these packages
don't, I don't want them
to have any real concept
of whether or not we're
talking, we're using ms. Test
or MBE unit or in
unit or anything like that.
So, So let me take
a second. So we're talking
about maybe someone has a,
a bill that has multiple
test packages. Like I know
we use M B unit
and, and unit in the
same project sometimes. And then
there's an cover, which lets
you see code coverage over
those tests. Right. You're saying
you want to hide that
fact. Yes. I want, I
want in the end cover
package just to know about
that, there is a unit
testing package and so all
unit testing packages kind of
adhere to a, well, we'll
say an interface for lack
of a better term. Not
that there is such a
thing in, in Nant, but
you know, the, the packages
each have a target called,
you know, unit tests dot
set up and unit tests
that tear down and unit
tests that run tests. So
the, the coverage package will
be able to run any
one of the unit test
packages. So the only difference
is he, you know, I
just kinda need to have
a class factory at that
point that knows, you know,
this is the target file.
This is the properties file
for that particular unit test
package. So what do you
use the term interplay, the
interplay between these XMLs passing
back and forth between these
different things? Right. I mean,
CEI is the act of
automating, but in the context
of what we're talking about,
cruise control is just a
process that watches source control
and kicks off these it's
a glorified batch scheduler, right?
Absolutely. And each task spits
out XML. Right, right, Right.
So we, we really have,
for the most part, just
one task in CI factory,
it, it kicks off the
Nance script. So it, it
goes to like basically a
sub domain in, in there.
And then from there we
fan out into, well, what,
what's the first order of
operations, you know, source control,
second order of operations, you
know, and on down the
line. So that, that main
there's, there's a file main
dot builds dot XML. That's
your, your main XML Nat
script. Okay. And are you
saying that you only have
one CC at tasks that
you've kind of neutered the
task concept within cruise control
and you're using your own?
Yes. And that's because there's,
it's just not flexible enough
when it comes to dependencies
and asynchrony and things like
that. Absolutely. I understand that
asynchrony is a big part
of what, what your stuff
can offer that the CC
net doesn't offer out of
the box. Is that true?
Yes. Yeah. I, So with
one of the projects that
I'm working on, they have
a, a huge amount of
a vb.net codes. They have
like a, I think it's
up to like 600,000 lines
of code and that can
take a while to compile.
And then we're, you know,
we want to run all
these other things on there
besides unit tests like Simeon
and, and code coverage and
independence and you know, and,
and more, and it just
takes a long time to
do that build. So then
people don't want to submit
to the build because it
takes so long. Okay. So
we can use this asynchronicity
at, after we've done the
compile, let's say we can
run unit tasks at the
same time that we run
a independ at the same
time that we run Simeon,
all those types of things.
So we can get things
done faster, as well as
some of these things, aren't
really germane to the result
of the build being good
or bad. So we can
also kick off some of
these processes to, to run
even after the build has
returned a result back to
the developer. So that's one
of the ways we can
really squeeze out some more
time. So if someone has
an existing bill, they've got
Nat, they've got an unit
and this is kind of
a typical vanilla cruise control
bill. I mean, most people
they've got, at least the
automatic build part working. You
think that the next step
is going to be to
add something like coverage or
using that they're using an
unit or they're using Nat
and B unit or Emma's
test that adding coverage is
a good thing to add
that that provides a value
to the team because these
continuous integration builds are creating
vast amounts of information. They're
creating reports, they're potentially emailing
out reports. It is, it
is, it isn't useful that
it just builds the thing.
It's got to provide some
feedback loop, right. To let
the team change things and
improve the software while it's
being built. Right. Right. And
so with, as we start
adding all these different packages,
the risk becomes that we're
spamming them. You know, we're,
we're, it's easy to give
them too much information even.
So we need some type
of way to point out.
Well, which information is the
most important? What, what's the
most important thing out of
this bill that you need
to be aware of, that
you need to take action
on. That's the key part
what's going to trigger you
to take some action generally
that the, there, the basic
means so far has been
failing the belt, failing the
bill, gets your attention, failing
the bill gets you to
take some type of action,
but that, that can be
kind of drastic. So what
are the packages that come
out of the box with
CEI factory that can take
this to the next level?
I see that it's going
to make things easier to
build, easier to maintain. I
can add and remove packages,
but we know what's the
hello world, SEI factory going
to give me, cause there's
quite a few packages I
understand. And we're going to
do a, a DNR TV,
I think maybe one or
two on this. And we'll
actually show screencasts of, of
how this works. You can
take a look@shrinksor.com slash M
M B M as in
mom. And then there's a
screen capture of the analytics
package@shrinkstir.com slash M M eight,
to explain how the process
works, how to jumpstart your,
your continuous integration. It appears
to me and maybe Jay,
you can agree with me
or not, but CEI factory
is kind of like file
new continuous integration. Yeah. Yes.
I I'm trying to make
it that way. I mean,
when, when I first started
out with this stuff, I
was, I was actually kind
of disappointed about how difficult
it was, took me, you
know, over three weeks to
really get something up solid
that I felt like I
could share with other people
in the, in the company.
And I wasn't, you know,
I was gonna be like,
well, or the response that
I was going to get
was, well, all right, we'll
use that. You know, I
wasn't going to get in
trouble for doing it. So
that just seemed to me
to take an extraordinary amount
of time and resources. And
I don't know, it seems
just kind of ironic for
some of this stuff that
we're developers and we're supposed
to make things easier for
our users yet. We can't
seem to do that for
ourselves. Yeah. So I really
felt like I also noticed,
you know, as I had
to make more and more
of these, I was just
doing the same thing over
and over again. So I
didn't see that there was
any need for, for it
to be this way. And,
and it could just, you
know, if, if we decided
on some naming conventions where
things go, you know, all
these, these things would be
easy to do. Isn't that
funny? How little things like
deciding where and what is
going to go where and
stopping, moving stuff around, just
coming up with some kind
of convention. This is why
the rails guys and the
Ruby guys are so excited
about their productivity levels. It's
because it's convention over configuration.
If we can just all
agree on how things are
laid out, right. Then we
can start getting things done.
Let's see tree surgeon by
Mike over at, at CDC.
Yeah. Thought works tree surgeon
from ThoughtWorks. Yeah. That was
the first time I saw
the concept of, and I
call it file new continuous
build, you know, file new
CGI, right. It just, jumpstarts
your, you know, it's one
thing to go and say,
here's a hello world, but
really when you need a
project, you need continuous integration.
You need a test framework,
you need all that stuff.
Right. I was talking with
a friend of mine, who's
setting up a startup and
he hasn't got a continuous
integration build server yet. And
he's like, yeah, it's on
my list of things to
do. When am I going
to get around to it?
But you know, the sooner
you do it, the sooner
it's done That, that's true.
We have that very issue.
And in our company where
it's like, the developers just
want to, I mean, this
is normal for them. It's
not anything bad, but they,
you know, they just want
to get going. They don't
want to have to set
up any of this other,
think about it. They just
want to start writing some,
some code. So it, it
can take a little bit
of a forethought, you know,
to say, all right, well,
hold on, I'm going to,
I'm gonna set this up.
So if it's easy to
set up, you're more likely
to do it. If it's,
if it is a pain
in the butt, like it
appears to be for a
lot of people, will, it
gets put on the back
burner. You know, it doesn't,
it doesn't appear to, to
show any productivity right away,
you know, Right away. But
Oh, after the fact we've
got a project here where
one of our guys has
not just building, you know,
binaries and throwing them into
a bin folder, which is
the basics, right? I mean,
the very, the most basic
build would just give you
a bunch of DLLs or
a bunch of . The
next step of course, is
building an installer saying, here's
my MSI. So that's, that's,
you know, that's a, an
improvement on continuous integration that
squeezes CIA a little bit,
but they started actually spitting
out virtual machines with a
complete integrated and built system.
So not only do they
spit out the MSI, they
actually use the calm API
APIs inside a virtual server.
And they bring up a
fresh VM, wait for the
VM to come up, log
in, all automated, go into
that box, install the software,
configure it, and then save
it off somewhere so that
the sales guy can grab
that, that demonstration VM and
go running with it. So
from our point of view,
from, from, from my point
of view, as someone who
does technical sales picking up,
the latest bill is actually
just copying a VM that's
complete down as opposed to
grabbing that MSI while someone
else might think of picking
up the latest bill is
grabbing some DLLs or picking
up a NMSI. Do you
have anything around virtual machines
that you, that you do
at your company or in
the product? Well, we, we
use one manually for comm
builds where we'll roll back
to, you know, the Virgin
snapshot and, and then begin
building from there on a,
you know, a clean, fresh
registry so that we don't
end up with corrupt registries,
you know, over time, you
know, after several months of,
of, you know, heavy, calm,
builds, the machine can start
to act, act a bit
flaky. So this, you know,
we're, we're always in a,
in a good known state
where we really trust what's
coming out of the build.
Well, another example that wouldn't
be virtual machines, but would
be the idea of what
is your build artifact actually
declaring to yourself and agreeing
as a company and as
a project, what is the
thing that pops out at
the end of this, this
assembly line, like, like a
CD or even better an
ISO image? What about that?
I've one of the last
project that I worked on,
we actually did that. We
had a, we delivered 20
CDs to the, for this
government project. So we had
20 different build processes up
building ISO images, so that
nice, that included documentation, everything,
you know, that was the
final. That was what we
handed to the customer. So
if, and that's what tests
took. So it wasn't like
test was taking an intermediary
and then somebody else was
going to have to take
this bit and that bit
and the other bit and
put them in the right
spot, on the CD for
everything to work. And, you
know, and by the time
you get to that point,
you know, test is like
worn out and they might
not do the, the, you
know, the most aggressive tests
on that, that final product
then, because they did their
work on the intermediate stuff.
So this, this prevents you
from having those last minute
errors. Yeah, exactly. Why does
there have to be a
manual, push a button at
the end of it all
where the CD, you know,
pops out, right? Yeah. I
think that's, that's really the
essence of, of kind of
squeezing continuous integration is that
if your build process, no.
I mean, no matter how
nice your, your CC net
server is no matter how
nice it is that someone
can check your code out
and say, bill dot bat,
if deploying your code involves
opening to Explorer, windows, and
dragging something, that's probably a
bad, that's a good, that's
a good idea that you
have a good idea that
you're maybe doing something wrong.
Wouldn't you say? Yeah. As
a matter of fact, my,
my released this beta release
for CII factory, when I
first published the zip up
on Google, I forgot to
include something in it. Cause
there was, I use Google
docs for some of the
install, instructions and whatnot. So
I was right. And they
don't have an API for
that yet. So to include
those docs in the CII
factory reset, that's a manual
step that I have to
do. And I, I forgot
something and I had to
republish the, the, the beta.
I can't wait for there
being another thing. Yep. The
one thing that wasn't automated.
Yep. Yeah. We're actually managing
the, the outline for this
show and the, the links
there. So all of this
sounds like something that, that,
that I'm interested in looking
at and spending more time
with CCI factory. I know
that we've got a pretty
sophisticated cruise control build here.
We're not currently using CA
factory at our company. We
basically based our build on,
on sweat and tears. And
before we got buy off
from the bosses, you know,
we just did it. We
just didn't tell anybody. We
just found whatever hardware we
could. I mean, how do
you sell this to your
boss? A lot of them
wouldn't think it was a,
unless they're sophisticated about this
kind of stuff would think
you're wasting your time. Well,
that's where I hope, you
know, CIA factory can make
that easy for you. I've
either with a screencast or,
you know, you can show
on the screen cast, it's
up on my blog right
now. Or you can just
download it and do it
and then show them the
final results. And it shouldn't
take you, you know, more
than, than five minutes to
get a, a working CII
factory up now, how long
it takes to get your
particular product worked into CII
factory will depend on your
product, but basically, you know,
it's, it's going to be
doing a reference. You know,
you put your, your third
party pieces over here and
you put your, your coat
over there and then you
get that stuff straightened out.
And there you go. So
I imagine it might take
most people around 20 minutes.
And so after 20 minutes
you have a working factory
up and running. And I
think that's a, probably a
pretty powerful thing to be
able to show your boss
that we have this right
here in house working right
now. You don't have to
worry about it anymore. That's
very slick. That's very slick.
So J flowers is it
J flowers.com and the new
CIO factory beta is version
0.8. And there's, I'm looking
here in your blog, 22
new net tasks, 13 new
net functions, nine new CC
net plugins, and 10 CII
factory packages, backup lines of
code EMIS, spill, and cover,
and depend tracking changes to
source code. This will work
with anything source it'll work
with continuous integration. Isn't something
that has to be subversion
and, and CVS. I mean,
you could be ms. Build
ms. Test. You could be
using team system. I mean,
we being enthusiastic about cruise
control and, and continuous integration
doesn't necessarily indicate that you're
open source or not, or
team system or not. Right.
I mean, this can work
no matter how hybrid your,
your product is, right. Oh,
absolutely. No, I, that was
one of the things with
CIA factories. I just want
to make, I want to
abstract that away. So whatever
package, whatever a third party
products are using it, we've
abstracted that it's just continuous
integration. That's all there is.
That's just continuous integration. That's
all there is fantastic. Jay,
I really appreciate you taking
time out of your day
to talk about this. I
really encourage folks that are
listening to take a look@jflowers.com.
There's always going to be
a number of links up
on the show site. And
I think in the next
week or two, we'll probably
do a DNR TV. So
you can see some of
this the way it's meant
to be seen visually and
not on a podcast. And
this has been another episode
of Hansel minutes. Thanks a
lot. And I hope we
didn't waste your time.